---
title: NTP -- Intro
---

##What is Time? Tough question...

*"Time has been invented in the universe so that everything would not happen at once."*

*"There is no change without the concept of time, and there is no movement without time."*



##What is UTC?

UTC (*Universal Time Coordinated*, *Temps Universel Coordonné*) is an official standard for the current time.

The UTC second has been defined by the 13th *General Conference of Weights and Measures* in 1967 as *"The second is the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the cesium-133 atom."*



Unfortunately the earth's rotation is not very much impressed by the definition of the UTC second. Having 86400 UTC seconds per day on an earth that's slowing down would mean that midnight would eventually fall in the middle of the day. As this is probably unacceptable, some extra seconds can be added or removed inside the UTC time-scale to keep synchronization. That patch work is named *leap seconds*.

To make things worse, leap seconds can be predicted as much as the earth's rotation, which is not at all. Therefore you can't easily make calculations for dates in the future using UTC; at least not with accuracy of a few seconds.



##What happens during a Leap Second?

During a leap second, either one second is removed from the current day, or a second is added. In both cases this happens at the end of the UTC day. If a leap second is inserted, the time in UTC is specified as `23:59:60`. In other words, it takes two seconds from `23:59:59` to `0:00:00` instead of one. If a leap second is deleted, time will jump from `23:59:58` to `0:00:00` in one second instead of two.



##Compute Bits and Registers

Assume we use 8 bits to store a time stamp. There can be 256 different values then. If we choose to store seconds, our resolution is one second, and the range is from 0 to 255 seconds. If we prefer to store the time in minutes, we can store up to 255 minutes there.

With 64 bits you could have nanosecond resolution while still having a range significantly longer than your life.



"*Precision* *is the random uncertainty of a measured value, expressed by the standard deviation or by a multiple of the standard deviation."*

"*Accuracy* is the closeness of the agreement between the result of a measurement and a true value of the measurand."



## *How bad is a Frequency Error of 500* PPM*?*

As most people have some trouble with that abstract PPM (*parts per million*, 0.0001%), I'll simply state that 12 PPM correspond to one second per day roughly. So 500 PPM mean the clock is off by about 43 seconds per day. Only poor old mechanical wristwatches are worse.



##*What is* NTP*?*

NTP stands for *Network Time Protocol*, and it is an *Internet* protocol used to synchronize the clocks of computers to some time reference. NTP is an *Internet* standard protocol originally developed by [Professor David L. Mills](http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-a-faq.htm#AU-DLM) at the University of Delaware.



## *Why should Time be synchronized?*

Time usually just advances. If you have communicating programs running on different computers, time still should even advance if you switch from one computer to another. Obviously if one system is ahead of the others, the others are behind that particular one. From the perspective of an external observer, switching between these systems would cause time to jump forward and back, a non-desirable effect.



## *What are the basic features of* NTP*?*

There exist several protocols to synchronize computer clocks, each having distinguished features. Here is a list of NTP's features:



- NTP needs some *reference clock* that defines the *true time* to operate. All clocks are set towards that *true time*. (It will not just make all systems agree on *some* time, but will make them agree upon the *true time* as defined by some standard.)

  NTP uses UTC as reference time (See also [*What is UTC?*](http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-s-time.htm#Q-UTC)).

- NTP is a fault-tolerant protocol that will automatically select the best of several available time sources to synchronize to. Multiple candidates can be combined to minimize the accumulated error. Temporarily or permanently insane time sources will be detected and avoided.

- NTP is highly scalable: A synchronization network may consist of several *reference clocks*. Each node of such a network can exchange time information either bidirectional or unidirectional. Propagating time from one node to another forms a hierarchical graph with *reference clocks* at the top.

- Having available several time sources, NTP can select the best candidates to build its estimate of the current time. The protocol is highly accurate, using a resolution of less than a nanosecond (about 2^-32 seconds). (The popular protocol used by **rdate** and defined in [RFC 868] only uses a resolution of one second).

- Even when a network connection is temporarily unavailable, NTP can use measurements from the past to estimate current time and error.

- For formal reasons NTP will also maintain estimates for the accuracy of the local time.



## *How many* NTP *servers are available in the* Internet?

According to *A Survey of the NTP Network*[[2\]](http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-s-def.htm#FTN.FTN-NTP-SURVEY99) there were at least 175,000 hosts running NTP in the *Internet*. Among these there were over 300 valid *stratum-1* servers. In addition there were over 20,000 servers at stratum 2, and over 80,000 servers at stratum 3.



##What is a *reference clock*?

A *reference clock* is some device or machinery that spits out the current time. The special thing about these things is *accuracy*: Reference clocks must be accurately following some time standard.

Typical candidates for reference clocks are (very expensive) cesium clocks. Cheaper (and thus more popular) ones are receivers for some time signals broadcasted by national standard agencies. A typical example would be a GPS (*Global Positioning System*) receiver that gets the time from satellites. These satellites in turn have a cesium clock that is periodically corrected to provide maximum accuracy.

Less expensive (and accurate) *reference clock*s use one of the terrestrial broadcasts known as DCF77, MSF, and WWV.

In NTP these time references are also named *stratum 0*, the highest possible quality. (Each system that has its time synchronized to some *reference clock* can also be a time reference for other systems, but the stratum will increase for each synchronization.)



##How is Time synchronized?

Time can be passed from one time source to another, typically starting from a *reference clock* connected to a *stratum 1* server. Servers synchronized to a *stratum 1* server will be *stratum 2*. Generally the stratum of a server will be one more than the stratum of its reference (See also [Q: 5.1.4.1.](http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-s-algo.htm#Q-ALGO-BASIC-STRATUM)).

Synchronizing a client to a network server consists of several packet exchanges where each exchange is a pair of request and reply. When sending out a request, the client stores its own time (*originate timestamp*) into the packet being sent. When a server receives such a packet, it will in turn store its own time (*receive timestamp*) into the packet, and the packet will be returned after putting a *transmit timestamp* into the packet. When receiving the reply, the receiver will once more log its own receipt time to estimate the travelling time of the packet. The travelling time (*delay*) is estimated to be half of *"the total delay minus remote processing time"*, assuming symmetrical delays.

Those time differences can be used to estimate the time offset between both machines, as well as the *dispersion* (maximum offset error). The shorter and more symmetric the round-trip time, the more accurate the estimate of the current time.

Time is not believed until several packet exchanges have taken place, each passing a set of sanity checks. Only if the replies from a server satisfy the conditions defined in the protocol specification, the server is considered valid. Time cannot be synchronized from a server that is considered invalid by the protocol. Some essential values are put into multi-stage filters for statistical purposes to improve and estimate the quality of the samples from each server. All used servers are evaluated for a consistent time. In case of disagreements, the largest set of agreeing servers (*truechimers*) is used to produce a combined *reference time*, thereby declaring other servers as invalid (*falsetickers*).

Usually it takes about five minutes (five good samples) until a NTP server is accepted as synchronization source. Interestingly, this is also true for local *reference clock*s that have no delay at all by definition.

After initial synchronization, the quality estimate of the client usually improves over time. As a client becomes more accurate, one or more potential servers may be considered invalid after some time.



##Which Network Protocols are used by NTP?

NTP uses UDP/IP packets for data transfer because of the fast connection setup and response times. The official port number for the NTP (that **ntpd** and **ntpdate** listen and talk to) is `123`.



##How frequently will the System Clock be updated?

As time should be a continuous and steady stream, **ntpd** updates the clock in small quantities. However, to keep up with clock errors, such corrections have to be applied frequently. If `adjtime()` is used, **ntpd** will update the system clock every second. If `ntp_adjtime()` is available, the operating system can compensate clock errors automatically, requiring only infrequent updates. 



##How frequently are Correction Values updated?

NTP maintains an internal clock quality indicator. If the clock seems stable, updates to the correction parameters happen less frequent. If the clock seems instable, more frequent updates are scheduled. Sometimes the update interval is also termed *stiffness* of the PLL, because only small changes are possible for long update intervals.

There's a decision value named `poll adjust` that can be queried with **ntpdc**'s **loopinfo** command. A value of `-30` means to decrease the polling interval, while a value of `30` means to increase it (within the bounds of `minpoll` and `maxpoll`). The value of `watchdog timer` is the time since the last update.



##What is the *stratum*?

The *stratum* is a measure for synchronization distance. Opposed to *jitter* or *delay* the *stratum* is a more static measure. Basically (and from the perspective from a client) it is the number of servers to a *reference clock*. So a *reference clock* itself appears at stratum 0, while the closest servers are at stratum 1. On the network there is no valid NTP message with stratum 0.

A server synchronized to a *stratum `n`* server will be running at *stratum `n` + 1*. The upper limit for *stratum* is `15`. The purpose of *stratum* is to avoid synchronization loops by preferring servers with a lower stratum.





##What is the allowed range for `minpoll` and `maxpoll`?

The default polling value after restart of NTP is the value specified by `minpoll`. The default values for `minpoll` and `maxpoll` are `6` (64 seconds) and `10` (1024 seconds) respectively.

For xntp3-5.93e the smallest and largest allowable polling values are `4` (16 seconds) and `14` (4.5 hours) respectively. For actual polling intervals larger than 1024 seconds the kernel discipline is switched to FLL mode.

For ntp-4.0.99f the smallest and largest allowable polling values are `4` (16 seconds) and `17` (1.5 days) respectively. These values come from the include file `ntp.h`. The revised kernel discipline automatically switches to FLL mode if the update interval is longer than 2048 seconds. Below 256 seconds PLL mode is used, and in between these limits the mode can be selected using the `STA_FLL` bit.



##What is the best polling Interval?

Actually there is none: Short polling intervals update the parameters frequently and are sensitive to jitter and random errors. Long intervals may require larger corrections with significant errors between the updates. However there seems to be an optimum between those two. For common operating system clocks this value happens to be close to the default maximum polling time, 1024s. 



##How will NTP discipline my Clock?

In order to keep the right time, **xntpd** must make adjustments to the system clock. Different operating systems provide different means, but the most popular ones are listed below.

Basically there are four mechanisms (*system calls*) an NTP implementation can use to discipline the system clock (For details see the different RFCs found in [Table 4](http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-s-related.htm#TAB-RELATED-RFCS)):



- `settimeofday(2)` to *step* (set) the time. This method is used if the time if off by more than 128ms.

- `adjtime(2)` to *slew* (gradually change) the time. *Slewing* the time means to change the virtual frequency of the software clock to make the clock go faster or slower until the requested correction is achieved. Slewing the clock for a larger amount of time may require some time, too. For example standard Linux adjusts the time with a rate of 0.5ms per second.

- `ntp_adjtime(2)` to control several parameters of the software clock (also known as *kernel discipline*). Among these parameters are:

  

  - Adjust the offset of the software clock, possibly correcting the virtual frequency as well
  - Adjust the virtual frequency of the software clock directly
  - Enable or disable PPS event processing
  - Control processing of leap seconds
  - Read and set some related characteristic values of the clock

- `hardpps()` is a function that is only called from an interrupt service routine inside the operating system. If enabled, `hardpps()` will update the frequency and offset correction of the kernel clock in response to an external signal 



[1] http://www.ntp.org/ntpfaq/NTP-a-faq.htm

